CHAPTER V.

EVOLUTION OF THE PRINCIPAL CONCEPTS.


After this general study of the nature of the most elevated forms of
abstraction, we must take the principal concepts one by one, and retrace
their evolution in outline. Let us once more note that we are concerned
with pure psychology, and are to eliminate all that depends on the
theory of knowledge and other transcendental speculations. As regards
the _first_ origin of our notions of time, space, cause, etc., each may
adopt the opinion that pleases him. Whether we admit the hypothesis of
_à priori_ forms of the mind (Kant), or that of an innate sense acquired
by repetition of experience in the species, and fixed by heredity in
the course of centuries (Herbert Spencer), or any other whatsoever—it
is clear that the appearance of these concepts, and the data of their
evolution, depend on experimental conditions, and consequently fall
within our province. Accordingly it is with their empirical genesis, and
development through experience, that we are concerned—and with that alone.


SECTION I. CONCEPT OF NUMBER.

The lower phases of this concept are already known to us. We have
traversed them in considering numeration, in brutes, children, and
aborigines. And here we return to it finally under its higher aspects.

At the outset, counting was, as we found, merely the perception of a
plurality; abstraction being practically at zero. Later on a rudiment of
numeration appeared, under a practical concrete form: we have perception
plus the word—a poor auxiliary, whose part is so insignificant as to
be mostly negligible. We noted the different stages of this concrete
abstract period, marked by the increasing importance of the word.
Finally we arrived at the point at which it is the prime and almost
the only factor. Number under its abstract form, as it results, from a
long elaboration, consists in a collection of unities that are, or are
reputed, similar. We have therefore first to examine how the idea of
unity is formed. Next by what mental operation the sequence of numbers is
constituted, lastly what is the part played by the sign.

I. To common sense nothing appears more easy than to explain how the idea
of unity is formed. I see a man, a tree, a house; I hear a sound; I touch
an object; I smell an odor, and so on: and I distinguish this single
state from a plurality of sensations. John Stuart Mill seems to admit
that number (at least in its simplest forms) is a quality of things that
we perceive, as white, black, roundness, hardness: there is a distinct
and special state of consciousness corresponding to one, two, three, etc.

Even if we admit this very doubtful thesis, we should arrive at last only
at _perceived_ numbers, with which consistent and extended numeration is
impossible. It can only be carried on with homogeneous terms, i. e., such
as are given by abstraction.

The notion of unity must however find its point of departure in
experience, at first under a concrete form; Although it may enter
consciousness by several doors, some psychologists, with no legitimate
reason, have attributed its origin to one definite mode of external, or
even internal, perception which they have chosen to the exclusion of all
others.

For some, it is the primordial sense, _the_ sense _par excellence_;
touch. The child regards as a unity the object which it can hold in its
hand (a ball, a glass), or follow uninterruptedly in all its boundaries.
Wherever his operations are interrupted, where there are breaks of
surface continuity, he perceives plurality. In other terms unity is the
continuous, plurality is the discontinuous. Numerous observations prove
that children actually have a far more exact and precocious notion of
continuous quantity (extension), than of discontinuous, discrete quantity
(number).[91]

For others, it is sight, for which all that was said above may obviously
be repeated. The retina replaces the cutaneous surface: an image
clearly perceived without discontinuity is the unity; the perception of
simultaneous images leaving intermediate lacunæ in the field of vision,
gives plurality.

The same may be said of the acoustic sensations. Preyer, in a work
on “Arithmogenesis,” claims that “hearing takes first rank in the
acquisition of the concept of number.” Number must be felt before it is
thought. Ideas of number and of addition have to be acquired, and this,
according to him, takes place in the child when it hears and compares
sounds. Subsequently, touch and sight complete this first outline. It
is known that Leibnitz assimilated music to an unconscious arithmetic.
Preyer reverses the proposition and says: _Arithmetica est exercitium
musicum occultum nescientis se sonos comparare animi._[92]

As against those who seek the origin of the idea of unity in external
events, others attribute it to internal experience.

Thus it has been maintained that consciousness of the ego as a monad
which knows itself, is the prototype of arithmetical unity. Obviously
this assertion is open to numerous objections. To wit, the late formation
of the notion of the ego, the fruit of reflexion; its instability,—still
more, this unity, like all the preceding, is concrete, complex; it is a
composite unity.

The thesis of W. James is very superior: “Number seems to signify
primarily the strokes of our attention in discriminating things. These
strokes remain in the memory in groups, large or small, and the groups
can be compared. The discrimination is, as we know, psychologically
facilitated by the mobility of the thing as a total.... A globe is one if
undivided; two, if composed of hemispheres. A sand heap is one thing, or
twenty thousand things, as we may choose to count it.”[93] This reduction
to acts of attention brings us back definitely to the essential and
fundamental conditions of abstraction.

Save this last, the hypotheses enumerated (and internal sensation
might also have been invoked; e. g., a localised pain as compared with
several scattered pains) give only percepts or images, i. e., the raw
material of abstract unity. This is itself a subjective notion. We said
above (Chapter II) that the question whether consciousness starts from
the general or the particular is a misstatement, because it applies
to the mind which is in process of formation, categories valid only
for the adult intelligence. So here. At the outset there is no clear
perception of primary unity and subsequent plurality, or _vice versa_:
neither observation nor reasoning justifies an affirmation. There is a
confused, indefinite state, whence issues the antithesis of continuous
and discontinuous, the primitive equivalents of unity and plurality.
It took centuries to arrive at the precise notion of abstract unity as
it exists in the minds of the first mathematicians, and this notion is
the result of a _decomposition_, not of any direct and immediate act
of postulation. It was necessary to decompose an object or group into
its constituent parts, which are or appear to be irreducible. Then a
new synthesis of these parts was required to reconstitute the whole, in
order that the notion of relation between unity and plurality should be
perceived clearly. It cannot be doubted that for the lesser numbers two,
three, four, the successive perception of each separate object, and then
of the objects apprehended together at a single glance, has aided the
work of the mind in the conception of this relation. We have seen that
many human races never passed beyond this phase. The abstract notion of
unity is that of the indivisible (provisory). It is this abstract quality
of the indivisible, fixed by a word, that gives us the scientific idea of
unity as opposed to the vulgar notion. Perceived unity is a concrete,
conceived unity is a quality, an abstract; and in one sense it may be
said that unity, and consequently all abstract number, is a creation of
the mind. It results like all abstraction from analysis—dissociation.
Like all abstraction, it has an ideal existence; yet this in no way
prevents it from being an instrument of marvellous utility.

II. It is owing to this that the sequence of numbers, homogeneous
in material, can be constituted; for the identity of unities is the
sole condition in virtue of which they can be counted, and the scant
numerations of the concrete-abstract period transcended. The sequence
is constituted by an invariable process of construction, which may be
reduced to addition or subtraction. “Thus the number 2, simplest of
all numbers, is a construction in virtue of which unity is added to
itself; the number 3 is a construction in virtue of which unity is
added to the number 2, and so on in order. If numbers are composed by
successively adding unity to itself, or to other numbers already formed
by the same process, they are decomposed by withdrawing unity from the
previously constructed sums; and thus, to decompose is again to compose
other numbers. For example, if 3 is 2 + 1, it is also 4 - 1. Addition
and subtraction are two inverse operations whose results are mutually
exclusive: they are the sole primitive numerical functions.”[94]

The simplicity and solidity of this process result from its being always
identical with itself, and although the series of numbers is unlimited,
some one term of the sequence is rigorously determined, because it can
always be brought back to its point of departure, unity. In this labor of
construction by continuous repetition, two psychological facts are to be
noted:

1. No sooner is unity passed, in the elaboration of numbers, than
intuition fails altogether. Directly we reach 5, 6, 7, etc, (the limit
varies with the individual), objects can no longer be perceived or
represented together: there is now no more in consciousness than the
sign, the substitute for the absent intuition: each number becomes a sum
of unities fixed by a name.

2. For our unity-type we substitute higher unities, which admit of
simplification. Thus in the predominating decimal system, ten and a
hundred are unities ten and a hundred times larger than unity, properly
so called. They may be of any given magnitude: the Hindus, whose
exuberant imagination is well known, invented the _koti_, equivalent
to four billions three hundred and twenty-eight millions of years, for
calculating the life of their gods; each _koti_ represents a single day
of the divine life.[95]

Inversely, we may consider the unity-type as a sum of identical parts,
and represent 1 = 10/10 or 100/100, etc. A tenth, a hundredth, are
unities ten times, a hundred times, smaller than unity properly so
called, but they obey the same laws in the formation of fractional
numbers.

It is well for the psychologist to note the privileged position of
what we term the unity-type, or simply 1. It originates in experience,
because unity, even when concrete, and apprehended by gross perception,
appears as a primitive element, special and irreducible. So long as the
mind confines itself to perceiving or imagining, there is in the passage
from one object to two, three, or four objects, or inversely in the
passage from four objects to three, two, or only one, an augmentation or
diminution. But below unity in the first case, and above unity in the
second, there is no longer any mental representation; unity seems to
border on nonentity and to be an absolute beginning.

From this privileged point the mind can follow two opposite directions,
by an identical movement: the one towards the infinitely great, with
constant augmentation; the other towards the infinitely small, with
constant diminution—but in one sense or the other, infinity is a never
exhausted possibility. Here we reach the much disputed question of
infinite number: psychology is not concerned with this. For some,
infinite number has an _actual_ existence. For others, it only exists
potentially, i. e., as an intellectual operation which may, as was said
above, add or subtract, without end or intermission.[96]

III. The importance of signs, as the instruments of abstraction
and generalisation, is nowhere so well shown as in their multiple
applications to discrete or continuous quantity. The history of the
mathematical sciences is in part that of the invention, and use of
symbols of increasing complexity, whose efficacy is clearly manifested
in their theoretical or practical results. In the first place, words
were substituted for the things that were held to be numerable; next,
particular signs, or figures; later still, with the invention of algebra,
letters took the place of figures, or at any rate assumed their function
and part in the problem to be solved; later still, the consideration of
geometrical figures was replaced by that of their equations; finally,
the use of new symbols corresponded with calculations for infinitesimal
quantities, negative quantities, and imaginary numbers.

These symbols are such a powerful auxiliary to the labor of the
mathematicians that those among them who affect philosophy have gladly
discoursed upon their nature and intrinsic value. They seem to be divided
into two camps.

One faction attribute reality to the symbols, or at least incline that
way. It is the introduction of the _nomina numina_ into mathematics. They
maintain that these pretended conventions are only the expression of
necessary relations which the mind is obliged, on account of their ideal
nature, to represent by arbitrary signs, but which are not invented by
caprice, or by the necessity of the individual mind—since this contents
itself with laying hold of that which is offered by the nature of the
things. Do we not see moreover that the labor accomplished by their aid
is, with necessary modifications, applicable to reality?

To the other, symbols are but means, instruments, stratagems. They mock
at those who “look upon relations once symbolised as things which have
in themselves an _à priori_ scientific content, as idols, which we
supplicate to reveal themselves” (Renouvier). Signs, whatever they may
be, are nothing more than conventions: negative quantities represent
a change in the direction of thought. Imaginary numbers “represent
important relations under a simple and abridged form.” Symbols are an
aid in surmounting difficulties, as, empirically, the lever and its
developments serve for the lifting of weights. “It is not calculation,”
said Poinsot, “that is the secret of this art which teaches us to
discover; but the attentive consideration of things, wherein the
intellect seeks above all to form an idea of them, endeavoring by
_analysis_ properly so called to decompose them into other more simple
ideas, and to review them again subsequently as if they had been formed
by the union of those simpler things of which it had full knowledge.”[97]

In sum: numbers consist in a series of acts of intellectual apprehension,
susceptible of different directions, and of almost unlimited
applications. They serve for comparison, for measurement, for putting
order into a variety of things. If we compare now the two extremes,—viz.,
the first attempt at infantine numeration and the highest numerical
inventions of the mathematician,—we must recognise the notion of
number to be a fine example of the complete evolution of the faculty
of abstraction, as applied to a particular case, the principal stages
of which we have been able to note in bringing out the ever-increasing
importance of signs.


SECTION II. THE CONCEPT OF SPACE.

The idea of space has given rise to so many theories that it is difficult
to restrain ourselves within the strict limits of psychology, and of
our particular subject. Whether or no this concept be innate, given _à
priori_ or derived from our cerebral constitution, we have here—setting
aside all question of origin—only to inquire by what ways and means we
attain full consciousness of it and determine it to be a fundamental
concept.

In order to follow its development we must necessarily set out from
experience; since space, like number or time, is perceived before it is
conceived. For the sake of clearness and precision, let us designate the
primitive concrete data, the result of perception, as _extension_, and
the concept, the result of abstraction, as _space_—properly so called.

I. At the outset what is given us by intuition is extension under a
concrete form. What first becomes known to us is not space but a limited
and determined extension—what the child can hold in its hand, reach by a
movement of its arms, later on the room which it crosses with uncertain
steps; it is a street, a square traversed, a journey made by carriage or
by train, the horizon which the eye embraces, the nebulæ vaguely seen in
the nocturnal sky, etc. All this is concrete and measurable, and can be
reduced to a measure, i. e., to a concrete extension such as the metre
and its fractions.

These different extensions, although given by the senses, and therefore
concrete, are already abstract; since they co-exist with other qualities
(resistance, color, cold, heat, etc.) from which a spontaneous analysis
separates them, in order to consider them individually. This analysis is
translated by the common terms, long, short, high, deep, near, far, to
the right, to the left, in front, behind, etc.

By a simplification which occurred much later (for it implies the
foundation of geometry) this somewhat confused and incoherent list is
replaced by a more rational analysis: height, breadth, depth, distance,
position. It marks the transition from the concrete-abstract to the
abstract period. It is in fact certain that before constituting itself
as a science founded upon reasoning, geometry traversed a semi-empirical
stage, it was born of practical needs—the necessity of measuring fields,
building houses, and the rest. Moreover certain great mathematicians
have by no means disdained to admit its relations with experience: Gauss
called it the “science of the eye,” and Sylvester declared “that most if
not all the chief ideas of modern mathematics originated in observation.”

Let us, without insisting further, recollect that extension is given us
by touch and sight. Touch is _par excellence_ the sense of extension:
thus geometry reduces the problems of equality or inequality to
superpositions, and all measure of extension is finally reducible to
tactile and muscular sensations. The terms touch and vision ought in
fact to be completely co-extensive, representing not merely a passive
impression upon the cutaneous surface, or the retina, but an active
reaction of the motor elements proper to the sensorial organs.

The term _acoustic_ space has recently come into use. Much work has been
done on the semi-circular canals, leaving no doubt as to the part they
play in the sense of bodily equilibrium;[98] some authors have even
localised a “space-sense” in them. Münsterberg relates from his personal
experience that while the vestibule and the cochlea receive excitations
whence result the purely qualitative sensations of sound (height,
intensity, etc.), the semi-circular canals receive others which depend
upon the _position_ of the source of the sound: these excitations would
produce reflexes, probably in the cerebellum, the purpose of which would
be to bring the head into the position best adapted for clear audition.
The synthesis of sounds, of the modifications perceived in the canals,
and of the aforesaid movements (or images of movement) would constitute
the elements of an acoustic space. Wundt, who opposes this theory, sees
nothing more in the semi-circular canals than internal tactile organs,
auxiliary to external touch.[99]

Leaving this hypothesis of acoustic space (which is by no means
well-established), we know from numerous observations that the different
modalities of tactile and visual extension, notably that of distance, are
only known with precision after much groping and long apprenticeship.[100]

Extension under all its aspects, whether perceived or imagined, presents
according to constitution, age, or circumstances, a character of
variability which is in complete contrast with the stability and fixity
of the concept of space. The conditions of this relativity have been
exposed at length by Herbert Spencer. “A creature without eyes cannot
have the same conception of space as one that has eyes; and it is the
same with the congenitally blind as compared with those who are in full
possession of their eyesight; and for the creature whose locomotion is
rapid and powerful as compared with the creature which moves slowly
and painfully.” Our bodily bulk and organic dimensions also affect
conceptions of space; distances which seemed great to the boy seem
moderate to the man, and buildings once thought imposing in height and
mass dwindle into insignificance. Without speaking of nervous subjects,
who illusively imagine their bodies enormously large or infinitely
small, there are also transient and momentary states of the organism
which considerably modify the consciousness of space; thus, De Quincy,
describing some of his opium dreams, says that “buildings and landscapes
were exhibited in proportions so vast as the bodily eye is not fitted to
receive. _Space swelled_, and was amplified to an extent of unutterable
infinity.”[101] “Deliberate analysis of their movements,” says Lotze,
“is so little practised by women that it can be asserted without fear of
error that such expressions as ‘to the right,’ ‘to the left,’ ‘forwards,’
‘backwards,’ etc., express in their language no mathematical relations
whatever, but merely certain particular feelings which they experience
when during work they perform movements in these directions.”[102] In
fine, the consciousness of concrete extension varies in quantity and
quality with the structure, position, age, and momentary condition of
the feeling subject.

II. Starting from these concrete data—extension as included in our
perceptions—how does the intellect arrive at the abstract notion of space?

The immense majority of men left to their own resources do not rise above
a confused notion, half-concrete, half-abstract, of the properties of
extension, and what Lotze says (_supra_) applies even better to their
total idea of space-relations. The fundamental conception in such minds
is simply the possibility of going very far in all directions, or of
placing a succession of bodies one behind the other. As to limit, this
operation remains vaguely undetermined. It is however translated into
current parlance, e. g., “bodies are in space,” and other analogues.
Space is conceived, or rather imagined, as an immense sphere which
encloses everything, as the receptacle of all extension. It contains
bodies, as a barrel holds wine. The primitive cosmologies which yet
demand a certain development of reflexion and of abstraction reveal the
nature of this conception to us when they speak of the circle of the
horizon, the vault of heaven, the firmament (a kind of _firm_ enclosure),
and other expressions which denote belief in an insurmountable limit.
This conception, which is wholly imaginative at bottom, is a fine example
of abstraction elevated into an entity, and the phantom thus created
becomes in its turn the source of idle or badly-stated problems such as
the following.

‘We have never,’ contends J. S. Mill, ‘perceived an object, or a portion
of space, without there being space beyond it, and from the moment
of our birth we have always perceived objects or parts of space. It
follows from this that the idea of an object or part of space must be
inseparably associated with the notion of a further space beyond it.
Each moment of our life tends to rivet this association, no experience
has ever interrupted it. Under the actual conditions of existence, this
association is indissoluble.... Yet we can conceive that, given other
conditions of existence, it might be possible to transport ourselves
to the limits of space, and that after there receiving impressions of
a kind totally unknown to our present state, we might instantly become
capable of conceiving the fact and of stating the truth of it. After some
experience of the new conception, the fact would seem as natural to us as
the revelations of sight to the blind man whose cure is of long standing.’

This argument is founded upon an equivocation. Mill appears to admit
as the basis of his discussion the semi-concrete, semi-abstract notion
of space, described above; namely, that of common sense. Consequently
he confounds and mixes up two perfectly distinct questions; that of
Extension, the concrete fact perceived or imagined, and Space, abstract
and conceived. In the case of the former, the problem is cosmological and
objective, and we are not concerned with it; it is, under another form,
the repetition of the discussion on infinite number,—are we, or are we
not, to admit a continuous, real magnitude? In the latter, the problem
is psychological, subjective, relative to abstraction alone, and will be
answered later on.

Up to this point, in fact, the concept of Space corresponds to the state
of evolution that we have so frequently denoted as concrete-abstract.
The true concept of space—of purely abstract space—was only constituted
when the geometricians (Greek and otherwise) disengaged from different
extensions those essential features which they termed dimensions, showing
by their science that elements thus abstracted and considered separately
can be substituted for all the rest. Stallo justly observes that the
geometrical elements are neither real, nor ideal, nor hypothetical;
they are _conceptual_, the result of abstraction. “In the processes of
discursive thought the intellect never has before it either sensible
objects or the whole complement of relations which make up their mental
images or representations, but only some single relation or class of
relations. It operates along _lines_ of abstraction, the final synthesis
of whose result never yields anything more than outlines of the objects
represented. During all its operations the intellect is fully aware
that neither any one link in the chain of abstraction nor the group
of abstract results which we call a concept (in the narrower sense
of a collection of attributes representing an object of intuition or
sensation) is a copy or an exact counterpart of the object represented.
It is always conscious that to bring about true conformity between
concepts or any of their constituent attributes with forms of objective
reality, the group of relations embodied in these concepts would have
to be supplemented with an indeterminate number of other relations
which have not been apprehended and possibly are insusceptible of
apprehension....”[103]

No one imagines that there are in Nature points, surfaces, lines,
volumes, such as geometry proposes them, nor that its concepts are
copies of these, but it is not therefore necessary to take refuge in the
_à priori_: abstraction suffices, the act, i. e., by which fundamental
qualities are abstracted, to be subsequently fixed by definition. It is
strange that Stuart Mill in his long and untoward discussion of this
subject should content himself with saying that “we have a power, when a
perception is present to our senses, or a conception to our intellect, of
attending to a part only of that perception or conception.”[104] In this
remark upon attention he is very near recognising the rôle of abstraction
(which for the rest he fails to name), but instead of insisting upon it
he returns to his thesis, that “the foundation of all sciences, even
deductive and demonstrative sciences, is induction....”

The concept of space such as the geometers have made it, namely at
its highest degree of abstraction, is thus the result of association.
It is extension emptied of all its constitutive qualities, save the
necessary conventions which determine it. This schema (apart from
all transcendental considerations) appears to us as the total of the
conditions of bodily existence in so far as they are endowed with
extension. Thus constituted, with the marks which are proper to it, and
distinguish it from all others, this concept, like that of number, is
susceptible of multiple application, while moreover it has no assignable
limits in any direction (i. e., according to the time-honored expression,
it is infinite).

Just as concrete number represents real unities or collections, while
abstract number detached from discontinuous realities admits of infinite
numeration; so concrete space (extension) corresponds to the intuition
of certain bodies, while abstract space, by an unrepresentable concept,
if not by words, implies an unlimited extension.

If, hypothetically, it were possible to count all the leaves of all the
trees in the world, this prodigious number corresponding to concrete
unities would be as nothing to the mind that can count for ever beyond
that. So for the extension determined by the movement of our arms or
legs, by days of railway travelling or sailing, by balloon ascensions,
and finally by the most powerful telescopes that can scrutinise the
infinity of the heavens,—in all these concrete, fixed, _measured_
extensions we can always imagine a beyond, because the end of one
extension is the beginning of the next. All that, however, is but the
work of the imagination manipulating abstraction. The law of construction
for infinite space is the same as for infinite number: this infinity is
only in the operation of our mind, it is a pure psychological process;
we believe we are dealing with real magnitudes, and we are only acting
upon our own judgment: we are but adding states of consciousness one
upon another. Space is only potentially infinite, and this potentiality
is in us, and in nothing but ourselves; it is a virtuality which can
neither be exhausted nor achieved. To erect it into an entity is to reify
an abstraction, to attribute an undue objective value to an entirely
subjective concept. The journey to the end of space as suggested by
Stuart Mill in the passage above cited (if by space he means the simple
possibility of containing extended bodies) would really be a journey to
the end of our minds: if he means a journey to the end of the real world,
i. e., determinable and measurable extension—which has no limits beyond
the imperfection of our instruments—then he admits implicitly that the
universe has bounds, he takes sides in a debate in which experimental
psychology (we repeat) sees nothing, and which it is even totally
incompetent to decide.

       *       *       *       *       *

During this century certain illustrious mathematicians,—Gauss, 1792, in
an unpublished work, Lobachévski in 1829, Riemann, Beltrami, Helmholtz
and many others after them, constructed a new geometry known under
various names: astral, imaginary, pangeometric, metageometric, and lastly
non-Euclidean geometry. Its fundamental principle is that our Euclidean
space is only one particular case among several possible cases, and our
Euclidean geometry one species of which pangeometry is the genus—that the
sole determining reason in its favor is that Euclidean geometry alone is
practically applicable to, and verified by, experience. These essays,
beyond their direct interest to mathematicians, have already given rise
to a considerable number of philosophical considerations. While they have
only very distant relations with psychology, they deserve notice, because
they enable us the better to understand the genesis of the concepts of
space, and are moreover a striking proof of the constructive power of the
mind, emancipated from experimental data, and subject only to the rules
of logic.

Our space being of three dimensions, the neo-geometers speculated in the
first place as to the hypothesis of a space of 4, 5, or _n_-dimensions;
later on they chose as their base of operations a space of three
dimensions, considered no longer as plane (Euclidean space) but as
spherical or pseudo-spherical, having, i. e., instead of a zero
curvature, either a positive (spherical space) or a negative curvature
(pseudo-spherical space). Their point of departure is the rejection
of Euclid’s postulate—they do not admit that it is impossible to draw
through a point more than one parallel to a given straight line. In
spherical space there is nothing analogous to the Euclidean axiom of
parallels; in pseudo-spherical space two parallels to a line can be drawn
through any point. In the first hypothesis, the sum of the three angles
of a triangle is greater than two right angles; in the second it is
smaller. Thus by deduction after deduction, the neo-geometers constructed
an edifice very different from ordinary geometry, subject to no other
conditions than that of being free from internal contradiction.

In our connexion, the sole utility of the invention of imaginary
geometries is to have reinforced, as if by a magnifying process, the
distinction between space _perceived_ and _conceived_; this assumes
various forms according to the process of abstraction employed and fixed
in definitions. “Euclidean” space has only one advantage, that it is the
simplest, the most practical, the best adapted to facts: in short, that
which involves the least disparity between the ideal and our experience,
and consequently the most useful. “Certain neo-geometers have in fact
maintained that it is uncertain whether space can, or cannot, have the
same properties throughout the whole universe ... and that it is possible
that in the rapid march of the solar system across space we might
gradually pass into regions in which space has not the same properties as
those we know”; yet this thesis, which, fundamentally, reifies an entity,
does not seem to have gained many partisans. Stallo criticises it at
length (_op. cit._, Chap. XIII).

There is no agreement as to the measure in which the new concepts
agree or disagree with the theory of space, “the _à priori_ form of
sensibility.” Some hold them to be indifferent, others to be unfavorable
to Kantism: this discussion which, for the rest, does not concern us is
still in progress.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conclusion, extension is a primary datum of perception and cannot be
further reduced: it is multiple, full, heterogeneous, continuous (at
least in appearance), variable, perhaps finite; while space (concept) is
void, unified, homogeneous, continuous, and without limits.

Many men and races never get beyond this stage of concrete
representation, which corresponds with the first moment of evolution in
the individual and in the species. The first step towards the concept of
space (concrete-abstract period) consists in representing it to oneself
as the place, the receptacle of all bodies. This is the direct result
of primitive reflexion: image rather than concept, to which the mind
attributes an illusive reality.

The true concept, resultant of abstraction, has been the elaboration of
geometricians. It is actually constituted by a synthesis of abstracts or
extracts which are, according to Riemann, size, continuity, dimension,
simplicity, distance, measure. This synthesis or association of abstracts
has nothing necessary about it; its elements may be combined in several
ways; hence the possibility of different concepts of space (Euclidean,
non-Euclidean). Space conceived as infinity reduces itself to the power
that the human mind has of forming sequences, and it forms them thanks
to abstraction, which admits of its seizing the law of their formation.

Intuition is the common basis of all concepts of space. Euclidean space
rests directly upon this, and upon definitions. Non-Euclidean space rests
directly upon it, but more particularly upon definitions.

Although inapplicable to the real world, these last—which are
constructions in which the mind is submitted to no other laws than
agreement with itself—are brilliant examples of the power of abstraction,
when it attains its highest degree of development.


SECTION III. THE CONCEPT OF TIME.

In evolving the idea of time, as in that of space, we must first examine
the concrete fact which is its starting-point, i. e., real _duration_;
next the concept which is extracted from it, time _in abstracto_—and this
must be followed in the successive stages of its development.


I.

Real, concrete duration is a quality known by itself, included among
internal and external sensations, as later on in the representations
which psychology, in what concerns it, must accept as an ultimate datum.

What is this concrete duration, furnished by experience? It might
strictly be said to be the present; yet this answer is somewhat
theoretical, for it must be admitted that what we term “the present” has
vague and fluctuating limits. Moreover, its clear and precise distinction
from what has preceded and what is to follow it—the past and the
future—is a somewhat late production. Of this we have objective witness
(see Ch. II.) in primitive languages, during the period in which the
value of the verbs was undetermined. Take again the fact, as frequently
observed, that children even at the age of three, or older, having
vague notions of past and future, make a general confusion, and do not
distinguish between “yesterday” and last week, between “to-morrow” and
next week (Sully).

Still, we must admit that the present has the privilege of appearing
in consciousness as the typical duration, the standard, the measure to
which everything must be referred. Nor can this be otherwise, seeing
that (as is too often forgotten) we live only in the present; that the
past and the future have no existence for us, are only known to us under
the condition of becoming present, of occupying _actual_ consciousness.
The present is the only psychical element, which, consciously or
unconsciously, gives a content and reality to duration.

It is essential to rid ourselves of the opinion accredited by many
authors, that the present is only an elusive moment, a transition,
a passage, a flash, a mathematical point, a zero, a nullity; on the
contrary—it alone has duration, is now long, now short. It is even
possible, to some extent, to determine its limits, and to transcend
this vague description. Here we are aided by the labors of the
psycho-physicists. We may say that this study, long restricted to
metaphysical dissertations, entered upon a positive phase with Czermak,
who (in 1857) opened out a new line, in which he has been followed by
many others. The numerous researches and experiments made upon the
“sense of time” may be omitted without prejudice to our subject, while
the discussion of them would deter us from our principal aims. We
must, however, give a rapid summary of those which relate either to the
actual perception of duration, or to the reproduction in memory of past
duration.[105]

1. This present, declared to be inapprehensible, has however been
determined as regards its _minimum_ duration. For the discrimination
period between two different sensations (taken as the type of the
briefest and simplest psychical act), Kries and Auerbach found durations
varying between 0·01 and 0·07 second with an average of 0·03 second. At
a later period, Exner, experimenting with Savart’s wheel, stated that
the interval at which two successive taps can be perceived separately
may be reduced to 0·05 second: as also for the sound produced by two
electric sparks. For the eye, the minimum perceptible interval between
two impressions falling on the yellow spot, is 0·044 second. Below this,
one of the conditions necessary to consciousness—an adequate duration—is
wanting.

Certain experiments contributed by Wundt and his pupils throw light also
upon the _maximum_ duration that can be apprehended by consciousness.
They made use, almost exclusively, of auditory sensations, which are more
closely allied than any others to the sense of time. Wundt finds that
twelve impressions equivalent to a duration varying from 3·6 to 6 seconds
can be clearly perceived to form a group. Dietze admits the continuous
perception of 40 beats of the metronome, provided the mind arranges them
spontaneously in 5 sub groups of 8, or 8 sub-groups of 5. Total duration:
12 seconds. Others vary in their conclusions from 6 to 12 seconds and
even more.[106] James is inclined to think that the actual present may
extend to a _minute_.

Of course these figures, of which we can only give a few, vary with the
subjects, quality of the impressions received, conditions of experience,
exercise, etc. Nor must we forget that these laboratory researches are
somewhat artificial, and concerned with the perception of “the present”
under studied conditions of simplicity which are not precisely those of
spontaneous consciousness. Still it is plain that “the present” is by
no means an abstraction, a nothing, and we may conclude, in the words
of James, “by saying that we are constantly conscious of a certain
duration—the specious, present—varying in length from a few seconds
to probably not more than a minute, and that this duration (with its
content perceived as having one part earlier and the other part later)
is the original intuition of time. Longer times are conceived by adding,
shorter ones by dividing, portions of this vaguely broached unit, and are
habitually thought by us symbolically.”[107]

2. Experiments relating, not to consciousness of actual duration, but
to the _reproduction_ of durations, and determination of the errors
involved, are numerous, and contradictory. I refer to them in passing
only because they are eminently suited to show the very relative and
precarious character of our concrete notions of duration.

Through all divergencies, the formula enunciated by Vierordt, the
principal initiator of these researches, remains stable; our
consciousness of time comes, not from a sensation, but from a judgment,
and in our retrospective appreciation of duration, we diminish intervals
that are long, and increase those that are short. The debates and
disagreements of the experimenters relate above all to the determination
of the “indifferent point.” Vierordt denoted by this term the interval
of time which we appreciate the most exactly, which we have no tendency
to lengthen or abridge, so that if we are required to repeat it
experimentally, the error is nil, or very rare. This duration, reproduced
according to reality, is 0·35 sec. (according to Vierordt and Mach); 0·4
sec. (Buccola); 0·72 sec. (Wundt); 0·75 sec. (Kollert); 0·71 sec.; etc.
According to another author, Glass, there is a series of points at which
we find maximum relative accuracy; 1·5 sec., 2·5 sec., 3·75 sec., 5 sec.,
6·25 sec., etc. Münsterberg again criticises the entire series of figures
and experiments, for reasons that will be given below.

Independent of these experiments, which are restricted to very simple
events, the facts of our daily life show to superabundance that our
memory of duration is almost always inexact. Thus it has often been
remarked that the years seem to be shorter with advancing age: which is
again an instance of abbreviation of the longer intervals.[108] It is
hardly necessary to say that our appreciation of duration (concrete),
like that of extension (concrete), depends upon multiple conditions, and
varies with these. Such are pre-eminently constitution and temperament:
compare a phlegmatic with a nervous individual; an Oriental for whom
time is not, with an Occidental, agitated by a feverish existence. Add
to these, age, number, and vivacity of impressions received, certain
pathological states, etc., and we find here, as for space, that the
variability of concrete knowledge is opposed to the fixity of the concept.

This consciousness of duration, fluctuating, variable, and unstable as
it may be, is nevertheless the source whence our abstract notion of time
is derived: but whence comes it, itself? Where does it originate? “Time
has been called an act of mind, of reason, of perception, of intuition,
of sense, of memory, of will, of all possible compounds and compositions
to be made up from all of them. It has been deemed a General Sense
accompanying all mental content in a manner similar to that conceived of
pain and pleasure.”[109]

Here are many answers. We may add that among these supposed origins some
authors admit only one, to the exclusion of the rest, though nothing
justifies them in such arbitrary selection.

Some prefer _external_ sensations, inasmuch as they give us the
consciousness of a sequence. Hearing has been termed the sense of time
_par excellence_. This thesis has notably been sustained by Mach:[110]
since in a melody we can separate the rhythm from the sounds which
compose it, he concludes that rhythm forms a distinct sequence, and that
there must be in the ear, as in the eye, a mechanism of accommodation
which is perhaps the organ of the “time-sense.” Others decide in favor
of the general sense, touch, capable in all animals of receiving a
succession of impressions at once distinct and forming a series. Sight,
with its fine and rapid perception of movements and changes, is an
organ admirably adapted to the formation of relations of sequence, the
constitutive elements of time. Were not, moreover, the first essays at
determining time (succession of days and nights, seasons, etc.) founded
upon visual perceptions?

The majority of contemporary psychologists are, however, inclined
with reason to seek the principal origin of the notion of duration
in _internal_ sensations; and these derive their prerogative from
the primordial and rhythmical nature which pertains to the principal
functions of life.

“A stationary creature,” says Herbert Spencer, “without eyes, receiving
distinct sensations from external objects only by contacts which happen
at long and irregular intervals, cannot have in its consciousness any
compound relations of sequence save those arising from the slow rhythm
of its functions. Even in ourselves, the respiratory intervals, joined
sometimes with the intervals between the heart’s pulses, furnish part of
the materials from which our consciousness of duration is derived; and
had we no continuous perceptions of external changes, and consequently
no ideas of them, these rhythmical organic actions would obviously yield
important data for our consciousness of Time: indeed, in the absence of
locomotive rhythms, our sole data.”[111]

“Rhythm,” to quote Horwicz, “is the measure, and the sole measure, of
time; a being incapable of regular periodic intervals could not attain to
any conception of time. All the rhythmic functions of the body subserve
this end: respiration, pulse, locomotor movements, hunger, sleep, work,
habits and needs of whatever kind.”—Guyau maintains essentially the same
thesis, under a more metaphysical aspect: “Time is embryonically in
primitive consciousness; under the form of force and effort; succession
is an abstraction of motor effort, exerted in space. The past is the
active become passive.”[112]

More recently, Münsterberg[113] has attributed a preponderant and almost
exclusive part to respiration. Although he affirms that the origin of
our notions of duration must be sought in our consciousness of muscular
effort in general, and that its primitive measure lies in the rhythm
of the bodily processes; yet the gradual rise and fall of the sense of
effort which accompanies the two phases of the respiratory function
(inspiration, expiration) seem to him the principal source of our
appreciation of duration. After a rather sharp criticism of the attempts
of his predecessors (which we have already reviewed) to determine the
“indifferent point,” he maintains that their disagreements were caused by
incomplete comprehension of the psychical events produced in the course
of experience. In the perception of the successive beats of a metronome,
or taps of Wundt’s electric hammer, only the auditory impressions are
attended to; this is a mistake. It is supposed that the sensation-limits
form the entire content of consciousness, and that the intervals between
them are empty. On the contrary, they are filled by an act of attention.
We are conscious of a process of variable tension which, from the
initial moment, goes decreasingly towards zero, and then rises again, to
adapt itself to the sonorous impression that should follow it. In other
words, there are, in the perception of three successive taps, not three,
but _five_ states of consciousness: three external and two internal
sensations. We must reckon thus if we are rigorously to determine the
_psychological_ conditions of experience. As evidence, Münsterberg brings
forward the following results, which are from his own experiments.

The “normal time” is first determined, i. e., the standard of duration
that should be reproduced by the experimenter as exactly as possible
(“time of comparison”).

In one case, different durations were given, such as 15, 7, 22, 18 secs.,
etc., without attending to the respiration (expiration or inspiration)
of the subject, who reacted independently of it. In the reproduction of
normal time, the mean error was 10·7 per cent.

In the second case, the same numbers were given again, but care was taken
that the subject began his estimation at precisely that respiratory
period which coincided with the beginning of the normal time. The mean
error did not now exceed 2·9 per cent.

In the two cases cited, there was no interruption between the
determination of the normal time and its reproduction; the two operations
succeeded each other immediately. If, on the contrary, a short pause, or
arrest, was introduced between the two, varying from 1 to 60 seconds, the
results are—proceeding at random as in the first case—a mean error of 24
per cent.; as in the second, a mean error of 5·3 per cent.

Münsterberg has been not unreasonably reproached for attributing to
respiration, among all the other internal sensations, the exclusive
privilege of measuring time. A less justifiable criticism asserts that
his thesis is devoid of value because we can appreciate the variations
in duration in the beats of a clock more readily than the changes in the
rhythm of respiration. This is confounding two distinct factors in the
genesis of the idea of duration: its period of formation and its period
of constitution; that which occurs at the commencement, and that which
takes place in the adult. Our measure is at first subjective, variable;
progress consists in the substitution of a fixed, objective measure.
Doubtless, the latter is superior in clearness and in precision; yet this
is no proof, not even presumption, that it is first in order: we shall
return to this point later on.

In short, our consciousness of duration is a complex state, more exactly,
a process—since it is less a state than a becoming. The rhythmical
visceral sensations are its core; it is an internal chronometer, fixed
in the depths of our organisation. Around this subjective element, other
objective elements are added and co-ordinated—the regular sequences which
are caused by external sensations. They form the sheath of the core, and
constitute the sensible portion of our consciousness of duration, not,
however, its totality.


II.

Until now we have considered time under its concrete form alone, whether
given as an actual event in consciousness, or revived as a past event
in memory. We have now to follow the complete development of this idea
to its extreme limit. In this study we may conveniently distinguish two
stages:

The first, which depends on memory and imagination, consists in thinking
a certain extension of duration, that may be more or less vaguely
represented: a day, a week, a year, etc.

The second, which depends on abstraction alone, gives time in general,
the pure concept, which cannot be represented, and is determined by signs
alone.

FIRST STAGE.—Certain minds never get beyond this first stage. In respect
of time, this corresponds to the lower forms of abstraction which we
have so often designated by the terms, _generic image_ and, at a higher
degree, _concrete-abstract notions_ (intermediate abstracts).

The lowest form, which is just higher than the recognition of concrete
duration, results like the generic image from the repetition of a
sequence of events that recur constantly, and are approximately uniform.
They are series of which the terms are variable, but which begin and end
always in the same manner. Such are the appearance and disappearance of
the sun, lying down to sleep and waking up again, and similar facts of
common life. The points of departure, the start and finish, are always
the same, whatever the variations in the intermediate states. These
generic images are met with among the higher brutes, children, and
primitive races.

To what extent are the higher animals capable of having a certain
representation of time, constructed from their experience of real
duration? This is an obscure problem which has been little studied. We
are not of course referring to time _in abstracto_, to the concept, but
to the recognition of certain often repeated cycles. Many animals are
known to have an approximate appreciation of sufficiently protracted
periods, supplied by the periodicity of their needs (hours at which they
get food, are taken out, etc., etc.). Prejudice apart, we know of others
which, in addition to this subjective physiological knowledge, possess a
fairly exact notion of certain regular and objectively caused periods,
determined by the progress of natural phenomena, especially by the path
of the sun.[114]

In all these instances we may assign as cause, the incontestable
preponderance (in animal life) of automatism and of routine: which is
equivalent to saying that the notion of these durations is formed by a
passive assimilation, and this—as we have seen—is the creative process of
generic images.

According to some authors, there are instances of exact appreciation
of much less simple periods. Brehm says that during a long passage
an ourang-outang visited the sailors every Wednesday and Friday at 8
o’clock, because on those days sago, sugar, and cinnamon were served
out, of which he got his share. An anecdote has often been cited after
Romanes, of “the geese who came regularly every fortnight, from afar, the
morning after the market, in a small English town, to pick up the corn
scattered on the marketplace. One year the market was postponed for a day
of national humiliation, but the geese came as usual.”[115]

These and other analogous facts seem scarcely sufficient in number, nor
strictly enough observed, to warrant any scientific conclusion.

We have previously remarked that, up to the age of three years or more,
children who already have an approximate knowledge of space relations,
(distance, proximity, within, without, upper, lower, etc.) have a very
confused notion of periods as short as three to four days, a week, etc.
It has been hypothetically suggested that the extension of the notion of
duration must for them arise in expectation rather than in memory, in an
orientation towards the future rather than the past.

The concrete-abstract period with its different degrees, limited on the
one extreme by generic images, on the other by the pure concept, is met
with among savage races, and in rising civilisations. It is a stage that
has to be traversed by every human race; many now existing have not
got beyond it. Days (solar revolution), months (lunar revolution), and
seasons, the round of the changing aspects of nature, give the primitive
and simplest notions of time in extension. No tribe is so low in the
scale as not to have reached this level. The determination of the (solar)
year, even when only approximate, marks a decisive progress.

The peculiar feature of this period, in its lowest degrees, is that
the notion of time cannot as yet be separated, or extracted, from the
sequence of events. We have already given many examples of this state of
intelligence. It is not poetical feeling that makes the savage reckon
the age of his children by the flowering of certain plants (and other
analogous locutions abound among primitive races,)—nor any innate taste
for metaphor: it is merely that he requires concrete marks to determine
duration. He cannot think the longer periods _in abstracto_; they must
be imagined, represented in virtue of a more or less arbitrary choice,
imprisoned in a concrete mould. Moreover, in the absence of any extended,
coherent, systematic numeration, the mind loses itself after the first
step. It lacks the necessary vehicle for movement in front and behind,
knowing whither it is tending. The natural phenomena which it takes as
its starting-point are poor substitutes for the absent sign, and moreover
rivet it invincibly to the concrete.

In my opinion, the culminating point of this period is arrived at in the
popular conception of time—considered as a vague entity which unrolls
itself, as it gives birth to events. This is the notion that is general
among most men of medium culture, who are ignorant of philosophical
speculation on the subject. It is the final term of common, spontaneous
reflexion, left to its own resources. Thus it is said of time that it
brings the unexpected, consoles sorrow, extinguishes passion, changes
tastes, solves difficulties, and the like; it seems to be an active
power, a thing in itself. In fact, no other abstraction has perhaps
been so often reified. We may further remark that time has often been
personified and even deified in several religions. Such an honor has
never been conceded to space. The cause of this difference is that time
has an internal, human character: above all, that it is opposed to
space as dynamic to static. It is an entity manifested in movement and
change, and thereby essentially acting and living. While, in the popular
conception, space is the _passive_ receptacle of bodies, time is the
_active_ spring by which the whole is set in motion.

SECOND STAGE.—The generic images of duration, and later, the
semi-concrete, semi-schematic representation of more prolonged lapses
of time, provide the material whence we obtain the purely abstract
concept of time. It was stated above (p. 153) that the true concept of
space was constituted on the day when the ancient geometers disengaged
from the different extensions, the essential features which they termed
dimensions. So must the first astronomers, without knowing or seeking for
what they did, have laboriously disengaged the essential characteristics
of time conceived _in abstracto_. First, they purified the notion of
duration from all anthropomorphic features, studying it objectively, in
the course of the regular phenomena of nature. Moreover, they introduced
measure. The Chaldæans of Alexander’s time, who possessed a series
of astronomical observations embracing a period of 1,900 years, who
made an error of only two minutes in their computation of the sidereal
year, who determined a cycle of 6,585 days by which they were able
to calculate eclipses;[116] who were later on the inventors of the
clepsydra, hour-glass, and other more or less imperfect instruments for
measuring the subdivisions of the day; all these counted for more than
metaphysical speculation in ridding our subject of popular conceptions—or
at least to a large extent prepared the way. Accustomed as we are in
civilised life to a convenient and exact knowledge of the flow of time,
measuring it off at any moment by clocks and watches, we forget how
widely different must be the state of mind in the man whose only guides
are approximations: such, e. g., as the varying height of the sun in
different seasons, with other natural changes apt to be misinforming.
The one life is precise, the other vague, or at least mysterious. That
our measure of time (as of aught else) is relative, matters little, and
the vexed problems of this subject do not concern us. By measure, the
notion of time acquires a _quantitative_ mark; it no longer appears as
an entity, but as a possibility of successive events, as a divisible
and subdivisible process; as an extract or abstract, set apart from the
events, dissociated from them by an intellectual operation: in short—time
is a thing no longer real or imaginary, but _conceptual_.

It is wasted labor to repeat for time what has already been said for
space, and is applicable to both concepts. Time, like space and number,
can be conceived as illimitable; but here again the infinity is only
in our mental operation. We can add century to century, million upon
million of years. This infinite time is potential only—constituted by a
two-fold process: either as a sequence of numbers, which is the ordinary,
simplest, and most abstract proceeding; or by filling it with fictitious
events, with arbitrary constructions, for the future; by evoking the
image of vanished states, when we go back to the first geological ages of
our globe, to the nebulous period, and so on. This conception of infinite
time is however quite subjective, and in itself reveals nothing as to the
nature of things: we do but add one state of consciousness to another; it
is an inexhaustible possibility of progression and retrogression; and it
is nothing more.

It is a common illusion to transform this conceived infinity into a real
infinity; we forget that the mind is only working upon the abstract, i.
e., upon a fiction, useful no doubt, but created by ourselves alone,
according to our intellectual nature.

Let us suppose that, in consequence of gradual cooling, the disappearance
of the sea, or any other cause, man and all animals capable of
appreciating duration were to disappear from the surface of the earth;
time would disappear with them. Doubtless the earth would continue to
turn round its axis, the moon round our planet, the sun to take its
course; yet nothing would exist beyond the movements. Just as—if every
eye were to disappear—there would be neither light nor color; if every
ear failed, there would be neither sounds nor noises, but only the bare
potentiality of luminous and auditory sensations if the appropriate
organs were to appear again: so, on our hypothesis, there could only be a
potentiality of time.

Consciousness is the necessary condition of any notion whatever of the
time which appears and disappears with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is no part of our subject to discuss the various theories that have
been advanced as to the nature of the psychological process by which the
primitive notion of time is constituted in consciousness. This question
is, on the one hand, distinct from the history of its development as an
abstract idea, which we have been endeavoring to follow, and, on the
other, from all hypotheses as to its ultimate origin (Kant’s _à priori_
form, Renouvier’s law of the mind, Spencer’s cerebral innateness) which
explains neither its appearance as a fact, nor its genesis in experience.
We may, however, complete our account by summarising the latest
psychological opinions.[117]

It is clear that a simple sequence of impressions will not suffice to
constitute the idea of time; the series must be cognised as such, felt
or thought as a sequence. How is it to be cognised? Contemporary opinion
upon this point appears to be capable of reduction into two principal
types.

1. Some admit, as adequate conditions, sensations and their consecutive
images, strong states and weak states; provided, however, that the latter
arise before the former have disappeared from consciousness.

Wundt supposes that similar beats of a clock succeed each other at
regular intervals in a vacant consciousness. When the first has
disappeared its image remains until the second succeeds it. This
reproduces the first, in virtue of the law of association by similarity,
but at the same time encounters the still persisting image. Hence
the simple repetition of the sound contains all the elements of
time-perception. The first sound (recalled by association), gives the
commencement, the second the end, and the persistent image represents
the length of the interval. At the moment of the second impression, the
entire perception of time exists simultaneously, since all the elements
are presented together: the second sound and the image directly, and the
first impression by reproduction.

“The phenomena of ‘summation of stimuli’ in the nervous system prove,”
says James, “that each stimulus leaves some latent activity behind
it which only gradually passes away. Psychological proof of the same
fact is afforded by those ‘after-images’ which we perceive when the
sensorial stimulus is gone.... With the feeling of the present thing
there must at all times mingle the fading echo of all those other
things which the previous few seconds have supplied. Or, to state it in
neural terms, _there is at every moment a cumulation of brain-processes
overlapping each other, of which the fainter ones are the dying phases
of processes which but shortly previous were active in a maximal degree.
The amount of the overlapping determines the feeling of the duration
occupied_.... Why such an intuition should result from such a combination
of brain-processes, I do not pretend to say. All I aim at is to state
the most _elemental_ form of the psycho-physical conjunction.” James
is careful to repeat in several places that he makes no attempt at
_explanation_.

2. Others admit sensations and intervals; sensations that are no longer
images, but internal sensations of tension, of effort; more properly
a subconscious element, which consciousness is able to apprehend by
observation or induction. This theory has a more active character than
that first discussed.

The cleanest and most complete form of this interpretation is that of
Münsterberg,—as set forth above.

Fouillée supports the same thesis as a particular case of his general
theory of _idées-forces_. The apparent present is a synthesis of real
presents. Our primitive perception is of change, not of stability; we are
conscious of transition. The static point of view must be completed by
the dynamic.

The complete separation of present and past is a mathematical fiction.
The sum of transition which is a factor in appetite aids in forming the
series. Time is a form of appetite; beneath the floating image there is a
tendency to movement. A non-volitional being would have no representation
of time: time is a form of appetition.[118]

“It is probable,” says Mach, “that time sensation is connected with the
organic _consumption_ necessarily associated with consciousness,—that
we feel the _work of attention_ as time.... The fatiguing of the organ
of consciousness goes on continually in waking hours, and the labor of
attention increases just as continually. These sensations connected with
greater expenditure of attention appear to us to happen later.”[119]

Others again (Waitz, Guyau, and more particularly Ward) admit _temporal
signs_ in imitation of Lotze’s “local signs.” Our successive acts of
attention leave a series of residua, variable in intensity and precision;
these “temporal signs” permit the conception of representations as
successive, and no longer as simultaneous. “What is this distance that
separates _A_ from _B_, _B_ from _C_, and so on?... It is probably that
the residuum of which I have called a temporal sign; or, in other words,
it is the movement of attention from _A_ to _B_.”[120]

These extracts will suffice to show the character of the second theory,
which seems to me the more acceptable. It is the more complete, inasmuch
as it takes into consideration, not only the clear states, existing in
consciousness, but the subconscious states also; it is not confined to
intellectual elements alone (sensations and images), but recognises the
necessary rôle of the active, motor elements.

Moreover, it seems more apt than the other to explain certain facts
of current experience. It is a matter of common observation that time
seems long to us, under two contrary conditions: (1) when it is very
long; (2) when it is very empty. Here we have an apparent psychological
contradiction. The two cases, however, are equally explained by the
quantity of the states of consciousness: the first is filled with
events, the second, with efforts. After three or four days of a journey
fertile in incident, one seems to have left home a long time, because
(in comparison with three or four days of ordinary life) the quantity
of adventures held in mind, each implying a _quantum_ of duration,
appears to us in sum as an enormous duration. On the other hand, to the
prisoner incarcerated in a cell, to the traveller at a deserted station
waiting for a train; briefly, to all who are in the state known by the
name of expectant attention, time seems to be of immeasurable extension.
This is because there is a constant expenditure of effort, a tension
incessantly renewed, incessantly frustrated; consciousness is nearly void
of representations, while it is filled with acts of attention constantly
repeated. This instance of time prolonged, while apparently empty, is
difficult to explain, if only the intellectual elements are taken into
consideration, omitting the consciousness of motor states. It should be
noticed that “full” time seems longer in the past; “empty” time, in the
present and immediate past; perhaps because the former rests principally
upon intellectual memory, which is stable; the latter, upon motor memory,
which is vague and fragile.